---
layout: default
title: Week 2
date: 2022-02-24
published: true

---
Plan for Friday, Feb 25

### Org charts


#### Present Org charts
- We'll meet in two groups on Zoom (see email and Slack for link). You only need to be present at the time with your name below. Screen share your Org chart. Which 'charts' engage you as forms? Which ones make you want to understand more about the organization?

##### 1:10

>> Kai, Ann, Jeremy, Lisa, Avery

##### 2:30

>> Rigo, Leigh, Lucia, Haley, Niki, Ziyu



### Prepare for Gemma Copeland

On your own when not in the groups above, read the resources provided to prepare for Gemma Copeland in the [Week 2](/2022/02/18/unit1.html#week2) section of the Unit 1 brief. Use this time to also look at the readings and references in the Unit 1 brief. Come up with three questions you want to ask at our 5pm Zoom. Place those in Slack under #guests 

### Current events

##### 4:00

>> All students on Zoom

Ann, Leigh, Kai and Niki will bring up news stories, headlines and current events relating to politics (and/or design) this week for discussion. Place links in #news channel in Slack if possible. 
*45min* 

Just following the current events debrief, we'll look at what questions you came up with in Slack for Gemma.

## Conversation with Gemma Copeland

##### 5:00

Same Zoom link for conversation <br>
*60min*


### For next week

##### 6:00

Brief recap for next week

- See the [For Week 3](/2022/02/18/unit1.html#week3) deliverable in the Unit 1 writeup
- Choose at least one symbol that you want to work with for the next unit. Bring in a representation of it. You will workshop it in class. 
